This is Emma Delkes from a volunteer with
Spencer Cardiff Reservoir talking to Phil Savage of Farsomart Digital Memories Project.
It's the 15th of November 2024 and we are at Lisbon District Centre.
So what are your earliest memories of the rental website?
Well when I was young I wasn't even really aware the reservoir was here because it was behind,
it always had a buffer of fields around it and high hedges and stuff.
So unless you were a fisherman or a sailing person you didn't really come here, you know,
because there wasn't public access.
So one evening when I was in the sixth form back in 1978 and like that,
I was on my way home from the pub and saw a gap in the hedge and just wandered through it
and it was night time and then just sat on the edge of this reservoir and I just couldn't believe,
I couldn't believe what I was seeing.
I was literally, I lived in Grouted Avenue and I was coming home through Fitness Park
and I couldn't believe it was so close to where I lived, you know, 60 acres of water and I hope you missed it.
Yeah, how lovely to get someone across that.
Oh it was a fantastic discovery, it really was, just sat there,
I don't know if you can see it in the visible time in the area, in the seventh form anyway,
it's only my 11th genki.
It was just nice to sort of sit in this place and look across this water in the moonlight,
it was just, you know, kind of thing you just never forget, you know, it was the first impression of a place
and you just knew it was really special, you know.
So yeah, so that was my first brush through the reservoir, yeah.
So were you, you mentioned fishing and sailing, were you, did you get involved in that?
Yeah, my mother badgered me into sailing, she said you should get up there and make the most of this fabulous facility,
and you know, like a lot of kids, obviously ignored my mother for seven years,
that eventually, you know, won't cap and came up here and I did my RYA 1 and 2 up here with Anne Barrett,
Anne and Fran, the two ladies who ran it, and yeah, it was great, we had really good times up there,
you know, and it was all run by the council, friends who are very good standard, you know,
and they had a good selection of boats to sail, yeah, they were very good at bringing you on, you know,
and gently introducing you to the various basic concepts behind sailing,
and I think the thing that really captured my imagination was that the principles of sailing,
a little miradingi, or a little tupperdingi, were the same as the great big naval vessels,
they all have to, you know, stay out of irons, you know, if you go directly into the wind you're going to stop,
but as long as you're outside the angle, I think it was called irons, it's like 45 degrees either side of the weather,
winds heading onto you, if you're outside, if you go inside that you stop,
but once you're tacking across the wind you're away, and it's just really clever, you know,
it's age-old stuff, the oldest man, you know, is Dale, and you're learning all these first principles, you know,
free energies as well. Well yeah, absolutely, yeah, yeah, yeah,
and I just remember sailing a laser boat, you know, these are sort of racing boats,
and I got in this boat and I was sailing it very cautiously, and Anne Barrett is yelling at me from the boat,
she said, she said, she wants me to lay flat off the side of the boat, hanging off the side of the boat,
she said, I want to see your head clipping the waves, and this boat just suddenly took off,
I mean it sailed in a way, you know, I was being ultra cautious, and she said something pathetic,
get your head out of there, and suddenly this boat just took off like a motorbike, you know,
it's like you're turning the throttle on a motorbike, and I shot across the Thantua, I couldn't believe it,
literally, you know, you have your eyes, literally like just the width from your nose to your ear,
from the waves, and you're skimming across the water, it was such, oh, it was just an amazing,
exhilarating, it was exhilarating, that's right, exactly, yeah, yeah,
and I thought this is fantastic, and I really, you know, and you come up here with your bag and kit,
and you'd be checking the wind speed and all that, you know, and you thought, oh, today's a good,
you know, thing for sailing, you know, and so if you were being sort of particularly confident,
there were two sail sizes for a laser, and you'd put the big sail off, you know, even though it was going to
throw you in the water quite a bit, if it worked, if it worked right, boy, really travel,
and the thing is, the reservoir, you know, going a diagonal across 68, you know, it's a nice,
you get a, you know, maybe about two, three minutes of zooming along, you know, before you have to tack
and turn, and it's really budding, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, so that was, yeah, it was good,
and they had a nice clubhouse as well, and it was called the place with, it even had coal hires in it,
yeah, it was lovely, it was a...
This flame you won't blow, okay?
Yeah, don't worry.
It's your heart wall, you think?
So what was this clubhouse like?
Well, it was family, it was a, it had a child roof, it was a single storey sort of bungalow sort of thing there,
and it had coal fires in it, it was a real museum piece, you know, sort of built, I think, post-war,
but it was really lovely, and one of the tragedies really of the sort of destruction that Western power
wrought on the place was they just all those deaths, yeah, and it was a real shame, because I think
if it had survived, I think they would have made a bit of a feature of it, you know,
and they'd expanded it with some very bland, terrapin building which we used for changing,
but that, you know, it got the job done, and then it has two old sort of virtually earth plasmas in Holland,
which had to be experienced and be believed, you know, but it all added to the kind of stick of the place,
you know, the feeling of it, you know, it was lovely, and obviously the visitor tent in there was fantastic,
but I think if they had that old sailing tent, it would still exist, I think they could have made something of it,
yeah, you know, it's got a real character, yeah, so, but yeah, there we are, we've come through it.
So what sort of dates was that?
Oh, well that must have been in the early 2000s, the RAD campaign kicked off in 2001,
the sailing I think limped on to about 2010, I'm not sure, maybe you can call that, I'm not very good on dates,
but then once they, what they did, they lowered the reservoir level very, very low,
so it made it very difficult to do it in the lurch and boats and stuff,
and when you're low down, you've got windshadow off the walls of the reservoir,
whereas the water's right up, you've got really good wind, sail with, you know, which ever got eddy and all that,
so they lowered the level, so they were doing anything that was for the sailing, yeah, yeah,
so that was the end of the thing?
Yeah, yeah, that was it, and they moved all the boats down to Cardiff Bay,
but I don't know, I didn't follow it down there,
but the boats were down there, I don't think they really, the sailing got off the ground there,
because the water wasn't really suitable for immersion sports,
I've actually fallen in Cardiff Bay, seen the water and I've had it in my mouth,
it's definitely not the same as the lovely fair water they had in Clannocking,
so...
Because everything gets flushed out of there.
Yeah, well this is it, you know, yeah, I mean, you know, they did a lot of work on the sewer jobs,
the forcing stuff, all the impounded things out of the bay,
but there's still lucky stuff going down there, you know,
so I think when you're learning stuff, you're going to spend a lot of time with the water,
you know, if you're stressing yourself,
so, and you didn't want to, and people would fall in any way,
they were getting ear and eye infections, you know, and tummy bugs,
that's why you're attracted, you fall in a sort of placement sewage, you know.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly, yeah, you can get the whole shebang going down there, yeah.
Anyway, there we are.
Nothing to compare to here.
So, do you feel like it touches any of the people you've learned to sail with?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, mostly Anne, and you know, the extra structure,
she's living in the area, and I did, after we were there,
when we were trying to work out a bit of the reservoir, you know,
when it looked like we might be able to beat western power,
but at that time, world board was on board,
so we were trying to work out a business formula for running the reservoir,
but actually, do your best thing, because they are a water company,
and they know their stuff, you know, and they've got to, you know,
they're set up for it, to run reservoirs.